---
layout: post
title: "End of the Google Summer of Code"
tags: gsoc
permalink: /blog/the-end
---

This Google Summer of Code was about adding peer-to-peer file transfers to
Dino. [Dino](https://dino.im/) is an XMPP client, [XMPP](https://xmpp.org/) is
decentralized instant messaging standard.


The work was mostly done in two larger pull requests. The first one,
**[dino#577](https://github.com/dino/dino/pull/577)**, added a Jingle framework
([XEP-0166](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0166.html)), the in-band-bytestream
transport ([XEP-0047](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0047.html),
[XEP-0261](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0261.html)) and the Jingle file
transfer protocol ([XEP-0234](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0234.html)).

Jingle is a protocol for (mostly out-of-band) peer-to-peer connections between
XMPP clients. It is designed to support multiple transport types, e.g. in-band
bytestreams, connections via SOCKS5 proxies or direct IP connections. It
provides support to send different kinds of data between clients, the two major
users are file transfers (described below) and audio/video calls. All this is
reflected in the code, the Jingle interface was designed to be extensible for
more transport methods and different data types.

In-band bytestreams are a simple method of exchanging binary data between XMPP
clients by sending [base64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64)-encoded data
in the XMPP stream via the server. It is a good fallback method in case no
other transport works, but adds 33% overhead to the data sent.

Apart from the HTTP file upload specification, the Jingle file transfer
protocol is another standard way of exchanging files between XMPP clients. For
Dino (and also in [Conversations](https;//conversations.im/)), this method is
used transparently (using the same UI) for files larger than the upload limit
of the HTTP upload server. This allows the user to benefit from both methods.

The work on this pull request was concluded by some [interoperability
testing](interoperability-testing) with Conversations and Gajim, two other
major XMPP clients.

The second pull request, **[dino#592](https://github.com/dino/dino/pull/592)**
(not merged yet, currently on commit
[6083f44](https://github.com/dino/dino/commit/6083f446b47e258e0381c0c22755dbfa881c7df7))
added the [SOCKS5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOCKS) transport method for
Jingle ([XEP-0065](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0065.html),
[XEP-0260](https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0260.html)).

The SOCKS5 transport method allows XMPP clients to exchange data via a direct
connection or via a XMPP-server provided SOCKS5 proxy. The direct transfer
only works if one client can see the other client's IP address and is not
firewalled, which is mostly the case if both the clients are on the same
private network. It is currently not implemented and is waiting for some
libnice support for enumerating the local interfaces (see below). Instead, the
data can be exchanged via a proxy reachable by both clients, determined by some
candidate exchange.

[Interoperability testing](interoperability-fun) for the second pull request
uncovered some old and new bugs in both existing clients and my implementation.
Thanks to the Conversations developer for taking my bug reports seriously and
responding very fast.

There were also a couple of other smaller pull requests which I'll mention
here:

- [dino#569](https://github.com/dino/dino/pull/569). Tiny fix for logging to a
  file.
- [dino#570](https://github.com/dino/dino/pull/570). Tiny typo fix, sorry for
  even mentioning. :o
- [dino#579](https://github.com/dino/dino/pull/579). Improvement around the
  error generation in response to certain XMPP messages.

In the course of the interoperability testing, I also opened a couple of issues
on other XMPP clients:
[Conversations#3478](https://github.com/siacs/Conversations/issues/3478),
[Conversations#3500](https://github.com/siacs/Conversations/issues/3500), <s><a href="https://github.com/siacs/Conversations/issues/3514">Conversations#3514</a>,</s>
[Conversations#3515](https://github.com/siacs/Conversations/issues/3515),
[Gajim#9784](https://dev.gajim.org/gajim/gajim/issues/9784).

As the **next steps**, after Google Summer of Code, I'll implement the
[WebRTC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebRTC) transport method to get
interoperability with XMPP browser clients that cannot open direct TCP
connections to SOCKS5 servers. Additionally, one could implement audio/video
calls on top of the current Jingle code.

At this point I'd like to thank my two mentors
[fiaxh](https://github.com/fiaxh) and [mar-v-in](https://github.com/mar-v-in)
without whom this wouldn't have been possible. They were quick to answer any
questions that arose, about architectural design of the code, the XMPP
standards or even just questions about
[Vala](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vala_(programming_language)), the language
Dino is written in.

Thanks to my mentoring organization, the XSF (XMPP standards foundation), as
well, for the weekly meetings and generally the advice given therein.
